# Should ChatGPT Be Banned From Classrooms?

The Artificial Intelligence (AI) chat-bot ChatGPT has taken the world by storm. Released in November 2022, ChatGPT possesses the ability to complete a variety of actions ranging from answering factual questions (with a degree of inaccuracy) to writing essays. ChatGPT could have a large impact on our everyday lives—especially in education. This has led to discussions over whether it should be banned from classrooms. 

Those who argue that ChatGPT should be banned from classrooms claim that the AI poses a threat to traditional learning. They contend that it makes information too accessible to students and will impair their learning as they will lean too heavily on it. Additionally, they argue that ChatGPT’s ability to write essays will lead to an increase in plagiarism. They may argue that ChatGPT in general needs to be more heavily regulated since it is a new technology with huge implications. 

Those who argue that ChatGPT should not be banned from classrooms claim that new technologies are constantly coming and going, and that students need to learn about them rather than be kept from them. They argue that ChatGPT provides information, but students will still need to rely on their teachers to learn how to think critically. This side may argue that ChatGPT should in general be minimally regulated so that humans have the ability to experiment and learn how to best utilize it. 

So, what do you think? Should ChatGPT Be Banned From Classrooms? Students can answer Yes, it should be; No, it should not be; or a nuanced answer in-between! Be sure to submit your answers by April 26th to have your answer be considered for this week’s contest. 

Note: Ideal Think the Vote responses include the following:      

- Address the question asked in a thoughtful and meaningful manner     
- Use cited facts and constitutional arguments when appropriate to support their answers      
- Are expressed in cohesive sentences and are free of distracting spelling, punctuation, and grammatical errors      
- They address counterarguments and opposing concerns in a respectful manner      
- They organize their answer in a manner that flows logically and reads clearly   

For this question, BRI will be giving away two 25 gift cards, one to each person providing the best defense of each side of the debate. Both students will also win BRI swag. Each student winner will also be entered for a chance to win a grand prize of a 1,000 cash scholarship. Additionally, the referring teachers for both students will each win a $25 gift card and BRI swag. 

This question will run from 4/13/23 to 4/26/23, so be sure to submit your answers in time to be considered for our prizes! 

voting result: **52.8%** yes, while **47.2%** no

source: [](https://billofrightsinstitute.org/ttv/debates/should-chatgpt-be-banned-from-classrooms)